Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture on merge sort.
So in this lecture again we'll have an explanation and some visualizations and merge sort and then the
following lecture will have an implementation of merge sort in Python.
So we're going to begin to turn our attention to using divide and conquer strategies as a way to improve
the performance of our sorting out rhythms.
And the first out room in this section of divide and conquer is going to be known as the merge sort
.
So the Mersch sore is a recursive algorithm that continually splits a list and half the list is empty
or has one item it is sorted by definition.
So that's the base case and if the list has more than one item we split the list then recursively invoke
a merge sort on both halves.
So once the two halves are sorted the fundamental operation that's called the merge is performed and
merging is just a process of taking two smaller sorted lists and then combining them together into a
single sorted new list.
So recursive calls are a little hard to illustrate bullets couldn't look at some figures or try to show
that as far as a simple example.
So here we can see this figure.
Your list is being recursively split in half by the merge sort.
So he keeps splitting the lists in half and then through a recursive call when you put them back together
what you're doing is sorting them on the way back.
So it's a little hard to show this recursive call here but this first slide you're showing the lists
being split in half.
So it's being continually split in half.
And here you're seeing that recursive merging taking place.
So the list has more than one item you're going to ahead and split that list and then once the two halves
are sorted that funnel operate the fundamental operation called the merge is performed.
So let's go out and take a look at some visualizations to get a better understanding of this.
OK.
So at the implementation of merge sort lecture you can go in and click the visual outwell resource for
review that will take you here and maybe they'll zoom in hopefully well actually zoom out because the
recursive call where it's going to do is actually highlights what's going to happen.
So you go and click merge sort.
And let's go ahead and slow it down a bit and go ahead and compute this sort.
OK.
So again you're going to split each elements.
And in this case you can see the coloring is basically defining this splitting that's occurring.
So in this case it's actually splitting elements
recursively into partitions of size one.
So I'm going to encourage you to check this out on your own and we can move it a little faster here
to see how these kind of splits are occurring.
It's merging them in half.
So that was your first half there and now it's doing it against the second half and then it's merging
everything together.
All right.
So let's go in and see it in full one more time.
So there are the little recursion calls that's kind of starting at the end in a sense just because the
visualization works that way.
They're either your first half and your second half.
And they keep getting split in half.
And then finally have them merge.
Okay.
So go ahead and check that out.
And again there's also a link to the Wikipedia page for merge sort which has a great explanation as
well.
So I encourage you to be checking out the Wikipedia pages for the Mersch sorts.
It's also going to show you here how it's dividing the list the smallest units which is just one element
and it's comparing each element with the adjacent list and then merging the two adjacent lists.
All right.
So go ahead and check those resources out in the next lecture we'll actually be implementing this sorting
algorithm in Python.
OK.
Thank you everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.